Dear Dr. Lazarovitch,

we would like to contribute to the special issue of Vadose Zone Journal with the following paper:

Title: A mechanistic solution for the combined water and solute uptake by plant roots
Authors: Andre Herman Freire Bezerra, Quirijn de Jong van Lier and Sjoerd E.A.T.M. van der Zee

Abstract:
A modification in an existing water uptake and solute transport numerical model was implemented in
order to allow the model to simulate solute uptake by the roots. The convection-dispersion equation
(CDE) was solved numerically, using a complete implicit scheme, considering a transient state for water
and solute fluxes and a soil solute concentration dependent boundary for the uptake at the root surface,
based on the Michaelis-Menten (MM) equation. Additionally, a linear approximation was developed
for the MM equation such that the CDE has a linear and a non-linear solution. A radial geometry
was assumed, considering a single root with its surface acting as the uptake boundary and the outer
boundary being the half distance between neighboring roots, a function of root density. The proposed
solute transport model includes active and passive solute uptake and predicts solute concentration as a
function of time and distance from the root surface. It also estimates the relative transpiration of the
plant, on its turn directly affecting water and solute uptake and related to water and osmotic stress status
of the plant. Performed simulations show that the linear and non-linear solutions result in significantly
different solute uptake predictions when the soil solute concentration is below a limiting value (Clim). This
reduction in uptake at low concentrations may result in a further reduction in the relative transpiration.
The contributions of active and passive uptake vary with parameters related to the ion species, the plant,
the atmosphere and the soil hydraulic properties. The model showed a good agreement with an analytical
model that uses a linear concentration dependent equation as boundary condition for uptake at the root
surface. The advantage of the numerical model is it allows simulation of transient solute and water
uptake and, therefore, can be used in a wider range of situations. Simulation with different scenarios
and comparison with experimental results are needed to verify model performance and possibly suggest
improvements.


We hope it suits in the scope of this special issue.

Best regards,
Andre Herman.
